there is a fashion at the moment there
has been for for a number of years
for writing books about the mind and
about thinking and about rationality
which whose main theme is to denigrate
human beings
and denigrate them for
being irrational is is basically what it
amounts to it begins with the fact that
they they have some misconceptions about
what rationality is or what constitutes
rationality so there's bayesianism
and the atheist movement and that kind
of thing which which has a hold on
something that is connected with
rationality but it's not the whole story
and it misconstrues
rationality for example by concentrating
on explicit theories
explicit ideas
and ignoring inexplicit ones or
denigrating in explicit ones as a result
they would be mistaken even if they had
the Right theory of rationality in
Hemley poppers or augmented with my
footnotes but even if they had the Right
theory of rationality supposing there
was a
papyrian movement
based on some book
saying how how how
important purpose of epistemology is and
deducing all sorts of things like what
political party to vote for how to order
your life uh and
suppose that that it was based on the
right epistemology the true epistemology
if it were framed as a critique of most
humans
if it were framed as a an Us and Them
thing where we are the people who
understand popper and they are the
people who don't and therefore we are
actually really the only ones who are
entitled to make uh political decisions
uh we are always right in a dispute with
somebody who isn't one of us you know if
it were framed in that way
then uh it would be a wholly bad thing
even if even if the actual content were
true and of course in real life
nobody not even Papa has the the actual
truth
and these rationality based movements
don't have the actual truth either
although they all have useful fragments
of the truth they they have uh as does
everyone and one can make progress in
understanding epistemology and and
um understanding how the mind works but
we're we're far from understanding it
properly
for example perhaps most recently there
is the so-called woke movement or
political correctness and and before
that there was a sort of um
post-modernism and structuralism and so
on and those are all
rejections of of the Enlightenment of
Enlightenment values uh some people say
that they are they are a reversion to
earlier uh ways of thinking with with
authority and violence and so on and and
they do
have a tendency to become authoritative
and and even violent but I I think they
are not that they are they are they
don't want to revert to let's say an
established religion although they have
in common that they and the established
religion want to set up an authority but
but they're unlike it in many other ways
in in most other ways
what they are is is a rebellion against
what I have called the the British
strand of the Enlightenment although I I
am deeply ashamed that I didn't call
this the Dutch strand of the
Enlightenment because that is how it
began
what is the Right theory of rationality
it's Papa's theory that knowledge Grows
by conjecture and criticism that there
are no uh sources authoritative sources
of knowledge that it remains conjectural
um always this has implications for all
sorts of things it it for example just
to take a wild example that wasn't in my
previous book the idea that um
circumstantial evidence and direct
evidence are different in kind is a
mistake all evidence is circumstantial
and people can be mistaken about what
they remember they can be mistaken about
what they see
they nobody can see causes anyway
I definitely don't so my book is some
ideas
about how
reason works and why
and what promotes thinking that works
and what impedes it but I don't have a
formula for thinking that works in fact
it's part of papyrian epistemology that
there cannot be such a formula because
if there were
it would be a touchstone of true and
false you could you could look into the
origin of a theory did it arise by this
method if so it would be more likely to
be true and there is there just is no
such method ideas have to be judged by
their content not by their source and
that that includes not only
who they come from
but what method they were obtained by so
another another kind of
um
version of of this uh wrong kind of take
on rationality is is
evidence-based science
or evidence-based Politics as we've
recently seen in where political where
politicians claim to have quote based
their political decisions on the science
and then they are criticized for not
doing so and of course it's it's
impossible to do so so they're quite
right not to base it on the science the
science is a critique
all all scientific thinking is critical
one one should take scientific critiques
into account
but that is not the same as basing one's
policy on science and in any case there
are more considerations than just the
science there's also morality there's
also Politics as the art of the possible